---
title: An Introduction To PStore
layout: post
---

This week I am going to dive into the PStore class in Ruby.

# Introduction

Have you ever needed to store information in a ruby app or script and reached
for the yaml format to write a file. Maybe you need to store configuration
information or need to store any number of records, but a database feels heavy
handed. These scenarios are exactly where you might be able to take advantage of
the PStore class in Ruby. In short it is a hash stored on the file system.

# Quick Example

Here is a quick example of how to use the PStore library.

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'pstore'

config = PStore.new('.config')

config.transaction do
  config[:name] = 'Frank'
end

{% endhighlight %}

# Transactional
One of the great features of the PStore class is that it is transactional. This
means that you can be sure that the data integrity of the information that you
are storing is intact if something interrupts the write process.

PStore won't even let you read or write data to your store without being in a
transaction. As the code below shows, when trying to set a value on the PStore
the library raises an error (PStore::Error: not in transaction). The same error
is produced when you try to read from the store as well.

{% highlight ruby %}
config['name'] = 'Frank West'
# => PStore::Error: not in transaction
{% endhighlight %}

If you wish to read from the PStore without worrying about it being writeable,
when you open the transaction you can simply call transaction and pass along the
read only flag in like this: ```config.transaction(true)```. When attempting to
write to the store when in a read only transaction, the library will raise the
following error: ```PStore::Error: in read-only transaction```.

PStore also has an additional transactional mode which protects against OS I/O
errors. This mode is called ultra safe and it can be passed in using the
ultra_safe flag. You can do this by setting ultra_safe equal to true.
```config.ultra_safe = true```

# What can we store

The PStore can store any object that can be marshalled. (I will be discussing
marshalling in an upcoming blog post). This means classes, arrays, hashes and
almost any other object can all be stored using a PStore.

# Additional Thoughts

There are a couple other methods on the PStore, but I have never found a use for
them and therefore cannot comment on the. You can delete keys, abort
transactions and commit changes immediately.
